FPGA: New Code Sample `minimum_latency` (#1302)
oneapi-src/oneAPI-samples: DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/Tutorials/Features/optimization_levels/minimum_latency/README.md

> # Minimum Latency Flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# `Minimum Latency Flow` sample
```

Author: Are we planning to do this change to all other FPGA code samples as well?

Reviewer: Yes, some are already doing so (e.g. autorun)

> This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to compile your design with the minimum latency flow to achieve low latency at the cost of increased f<sub>MAX</sub>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to compile your design with the minimum latency flow to achieve low latency at the cost of reduced f<sub>MAX</sub>.
```

| Software                          | Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler
| What you will learn               | How to use the minimum latency flow to compile low-latency designs<br>How to manually override underlying controls set by the minimum latency flow
| Time to complete                  | 20 minutes

> **Note**: Even though the Intel DPC++/C++ OneAPI compiler is enough to compile for emulation, generating reports and generating RTL, there are extra software requirements for the simulation flow and FPGA compiles.
>
> For using the simulator flow, one of the following simulators must be installed and accessible through your PATH:
> - Questa*-Intel® FPGA Edition
> - Questa*-Intel® FPGA Starter Edition
> - ModelSim® SE
>
> When using the hardware compile flow, Intel® Quartus® Prime Pro Edition must be installed and accessible through your PATH.

> 

Reviewer: You will need to register your new sample in /DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md
And add the appropriate Prerequisite section (all the samples now have one)

## Purpose

> This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to use the minimum latency flow to compile low-latency designs and how to manually override underlying controls set by the minimum latency flow. By default, the minimum latency flow tries to achieve lower latency at the cost of decresed f<sub>MAX</sub>, so this flow is a good starting point for optimizing latency-sensitive designs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to use the minimum latency flow to compile low-latency designs and how to manually override underlying controls set by the minimum latency flow. By default, the minimum latency flow tries to achieve lower latency at the cost of decreased f<sub>MAX</sub>, so this flow is a good starting point for optimizing latency-sensitive designs.
```

To compile your design with the minimum latency flow, pass the `-Xsoptimize=latency` flag to the `icpx` command.

The minimum latency flow implies the following compiler controls:

> - Disable hyper-optimized handshaking on Intel Stratix&reg; 10 and Intel Agilex&trade; devices

Reviewer: Should it be on all devices?

Author: Hyper-optimized handshaking only exists on S10 and Agilex.

Reviewer: Can we then mention: Disable hyper-optimized handshaking
Rather than specifying which devices support them? (see other comment about IPA)

- Use zero-latency stall-free clusters exit FIFO
- Disable loop speculation
- Remove the 1-cycle delay on the pipelined loop limiter

The following table shows how users can manually override these underlying controls:
||Control Flags/Attributes|Reference
|:---|:---|:---
|Hyper-optimized handshaking|`-Xshyper-optimized-handshaking=<auto\|off\|on>`|[Modify the Handshaking Protocol Between Clusters](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-fpga-optimization-guide/top/flags-attr-prag-ext/optimization-flags/hyper-opt-handshaking.html)
|Exit FIFO latency of stall-free clusters|`-Xssfc-exit-fifo-type=<default\|zero-latency\|low-latency>`|[Global Control of Exit FIFO Latency of Stall-free Clusters](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-fpga-optimization-guide/top/flags-attr-prag-ext/optimization-flags/control-exit-fifo-latency.html)
|Loop speculation|`[[intel::speculated_iterations(N)]]`|[`speculated_iterations` Attribute](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-fpga-optimization-guide/top/flags-attr-prag-ext/loop-directives/speculated-iterations-attribute.html) 

> |Pipelined loop limiter|N/A|N/A

Reviewer: Please format this table nicely for the readers that will have a look at the plain text version

> > **Note**: The more specific manual control overrides minimum latency flow's default control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: Using one of these manual controls overrides the `-Xsoptimize=` compiler flag.
```

Author: How about
```suggestion
> **Note**: Using these manual controls overrides the corresponding underlying controls of the `-Xsoptimize=latency` compiler flag.
```
Using one of those manual controls doesn't override the whole `-Xsoptimize=latency` flag.

Reviewer: So you need to use them all to override the flag? I'm not sure to understand this sentence then :)

Author: There are four underlying controls provided by `-Xsoptimize=latency`, manual controls override them individually without affecting other underlying controls.

Part 2 compiles the design with the `-Xsoptimize=latency` flag, so the minimum latency flow is used in this compile. By setting up the underlying compiler controls listed above, the minimum latency flow achieves lower latency by trading off f<sub>MAX</sub>.

Part 3 also compiles the design with the minimum latency flow, as well as manual controls that revert minimum latency flow's default underlying controls. Therefore, latency and f<sub>MAX</sub> of this compile are the same as part 1.

### Additional Documentation
- [Explore SYCL* Through Intel&reg; FPGA Code Samples](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/articles/explore-dpcpp-through-intel-fpga-code-samples.html) helps you to navigate the samples and build your knowledge of FPGAs and SYCL.
- [FPGA Optimization Guide for Intel&reg; oneAPI Toolkits](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-fpga-optimization-guide) helps you understand how to target FPGAs using SYCL and Intel&reg; oneAPI Toolkits.

> - [Intel&reg; oneAPI Programming Guide](https://software.intel.com/en-us/oneapi-programming-guide) helps you understand target-independent, SYCL-compliant programming using Intel&reg; oneAPI Toolkits.

Reviewer: Please remove this section

## Key Concepts

* How to use the minimum latency flow to compile low-latency designs
* How to manually override underlying controls set by the minimum latency flow

## Building the `minimum_latency` Tutorial

> > **Note**: If you have not already done so, set up your CLI
> > environment by sourcing  the `setvars` script located in
> > the root of your oneAPI installation.
> >
> > Linux*:
> > - For system wide installations: `. /opt/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`
> > - For private installations: `. ~/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`
> >
> > Windows*:
> > - `C:\Program Files(x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat`
> >
> >For more information on environment variables, see **Use the setvars Script** for [Linux or macOS](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-programming-guide/top/oneapi-development-environment-setup/use-the-setvars-script-with-linux-or-macos.html), or [Windows](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-programming-guide/top/oneapi-development-environment-setup/use-the-setvars-script-with-windows.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: When working with the command-line interface (CLI), you should configure the oneAPI toolkits using environment variables. 
> Set up your CLI environment by sourcing the `setvars` script located in the root of your oneAPI installation every time you open a new terminal window. 
> This practice ensures that your compiler, libraries, and tools are ready for development.
>
> Linux*:
> - For system wide installations: `. /opt/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`
> - For private installations: ` . ~/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`
> - For non-POSIX shells, like csh, use the following command: `bash -c 'source <install-dir>/setvars.sh ; exec csh'`
>
> Windows*:
> - `C:\Program Files(x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat`
> - Windows PowerShell*, use the following command: `cmd.exe "/K" '"C:\Program Files (x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat" && powershell'`
>
> For more information on configuring environment variables, see [Use the setvars Script with Linux* or macOS*](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-programming-guide/top/oneapi-development-environment-setup/use-the-setvars-script-with-linux-or-macos.html) or [Use the setvars Script with Windows*](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-programming-guide/top/oneapi-development-environment-setup/use-the-setvars-script-with-windows.html).
```

When compiling for FPGA hardware, it is recommended to increase the job timeout to 12h.

### Using Visual Studio Code*  (Optional)

You can use Visual Studio Code (VS Code) extensions to set your environment, create launch configurations,
and browse and download samples.

The basic steps to build and run a sample using VS Code include:
 - Download a sample using the extension **Code Sample Browser for Intel&reg; oneAPI Toolkits**.
 - Configure the oneAPI environment with the extension **Environment Configurator for Intel&reg; oneAPI Toolkits**.
 - Open a Terminal in VS Code (**Terminal>New Terminal**).
 - Run the sample in the VS Code terminal using the instructions below.
 - (Linux only) Debug your GPU application with GDB for Intel&reg; oneAPI toolkits using the Generate Launch Configurations extension.

To learn more about the extensions and how to configure the oneAPI environment, see

> [Using Visual Studio Code with Intel&reg; oneAPI Toolkits](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/using-vs-code-with-intel-oneapi/top.html).

Reviewer: Remove these sections

     ``
   * Compile for FPGA hardware (longer compile time, targets FPGA device):
     ```
     nmake fpga
     ```

> **Note**: The Intel&reg; PAC with Intel Arria&reg; 10 GX FPGA and Intel&reg; FPGA PAC D5005 (with Intel Stratix&reg; 10 SX) do not support Windows*. Compiling to FPGA hardware on Windows* requires a third-party or custom Board Support Package (BSP) with Windows* support.

> **Note**: If you encounter any issues with long paths when compiling under Windows*, you may have to create your ‘build’ directory in a shorter path, for example c:\samples\build.  You can then run cmake from that directory, and provide cmake with the full path to your sample directory.

### Troubleshooting

If an error occurs, you can get more details by running `make` with
the `VERBOSE=1` argument:
``make VERBOSE=1``
For more comprehensive troubleshooting, use the Diagnostics Utility for
Intel&reg; oneAPI Toolkits, which provides system checks to find missing
dependencies and permissions errors.
[Learn more](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/diagnostic-utility-user-guide/top.html).

### In Third-Party Integrated Development Environments (IDEs)

> You can compile and run this tutorial in the Eclipse* IDE (in Linux*) and the Visual Studio* IDE (in Windows*). For instructions, refer to the following link: [FPGA Workflows on Third-Party IDEs for Intel&reg; oneAPI Toolkits](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/intel-oneapi-dpcpp-fpga-workflow-on-ide.html).

Reviewer: Remove these sections

Navigate to **Clock Frequency Summary** (**Summary > Clock Frequency Summary**) in `no_control.fpga.prj/reports/report.html`, `minimum_latency.fpga.prj/reports/report.html`, and `manual_revert.fpga.prj/reports/report.html` (after `make fpga` completes). In this table, you can find the actual f<sub>MAX</sub>. The f<sub>MAX</sub> of the compile with the minimum latency flow (part 2) should be smaller than the other two compiles. Also, the f<sub>MAX</sub> of the other two compiles (part 1 & 3) should be the same. Note that only the report generated by the FPGA hardware compile will reflect the true f<sub>MAX</sub> affected by the minimum latency flow. The difference is **not** apparent in the reports generated by `make report` because a design's f<sub>MAX</sub> cannot be predicted.

## Running the Sample

1. Run the sample on the FPGA emulator (the kernel executes on the CPU):

   ```bash
   ./no_control.fpga_emu               (Linux)
   no_control.fpga_emu.exe             (Windows)
   ```

2. Run the sample on the FPGA simulator device:
   ```bash
   # Sample without minimum latency flow

>    ./no_control.fpga_sim               (Linux)

Reviewer: Please have a look at the other samples as we now need to set an env variable to run the simulator (CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=1)

>
> For using the simulator flow, Intel® Quartus® Prime Pro Edition and one of the following simulators must be installed and accessible through your PATH:
> - Questa*-Intel® FPGA Edition
> - Questa*-Intel® FPGA Starter Edition
> - ModelSim® SE
>
> When using the hardware compile flow, Intel® Quartus® Prime Pro Edition must be installed and accessible through your PATH.

## Prerequisites

This sample is part of the FPGA code samples.
It is categorized as a Tier 3 sample that demonstatres a compiler feature.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
   tier1("Tier 1: Get Started")
   tier2("Tier 2: Explore the Fundamentals")
   tier3("Tier 3: Explore the Advanced Techniques")
   tier4("Tier 4: Explore the Reference Designs")

   tier1 --> tier2 --> tier3 --> tier4

   style tier1 fill:#0071c1,stroke:#0071c1,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff
   style tier2 fill:#0071c1,stroke:#0071c1,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff
   style tier3 fill:#f96,stroke:#333,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff
   style tier4 fill:#0071c1,stroke:#0071c1,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff
```

> Find more information about how to navigate this part of the code samples in the [FPGA top-level README.md](/DirectProgramming/DPC++FPGA/README.md).
> You can also find more information about [troubleshooting build errors](/DirectProgramming/DPC++FPGA/README.md#troubleshooting), [running the sample on the Intel® DevCloud](/DirectProgramming/DPC++FPGA/README.md#build-and-run-the-samples-on-intel-devcloud-optional), [using Visual Studio Code with the code samples](/DirectProgramming/DPC++FPGA/README.md#use-visual-studio-code-vs-code-optional), [links to selected documentation](/DirectProgramming/DPC++FPGA/README.md#documentation), etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Find more information about how to navigate this part of the code samples in the [FPGA top-level README.md](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md).
You can also find more information about [troubleshooting build errors](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#troubleshooting), [running the sample on the Intel® DevCloud](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#build-and-run-the-samples-on-intel-devcloud-optional), [using Visual Studio Code with the code samples](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#use-visual-studio-code-vs-code-optional), [links to selected documentation](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#documentation), etc.
```
